we're now becoming aware of a
significant relationship between
sleep and alzheimer's disease
[Music]
now alzheimer's disease is a form of
dementia
typified usually by memory loss and
memory decline
and what we've started to understand is
that there are
several different proteins that seem to
go awry
in alzheimer's disease one of those
proteins is a sticky toxic substance
called
beta-amyloid that builds up in the brain
the other
is something called tau protein how are
these things
related to sleep well first if we look
at a large-scale epidemiological level
what we know is that individuals who
report sleeping typically
less than six hours a night have a
significantly higher risk
of going on to develop high amounts of
that beta amyloid in their brain
later in life we also know that two
sleep disorders
including insomnia and sleep apnea or
heavy snoring
are associated with a significantly
higher risk
of alzheimer's disease in late life
those
are of course simply associational
studies they don't prove
causality but more recently we actually
have identified that causal evidence
in fact if you take a healthy human
being and you deprive them of sleep for
just one night
and the next day we see an immediate
increase
in that beta amyloid both circulating in
their bloodstream
circulating in what we call the
cerebrospinal fluid and most recently
after just one night of sleep
using special brain imaging technology
scientists have found
that there is an immediate increase in
beta amyloid directly in the brain
itself
so that's the causal evidence what is it
then
about sleep that seems to provide a
mechanism
that prevents the escalation of these
alzheimer's related proteins
well several years ago a scientist
called macon nedergaard
made a remarkable discovery what she
identified
was a cleansing system in the brain
now before that we knew that the body
had a cleansing system
and many of you may be familiar with
this it's called the lymphatic system
but we didn't think that the brain had
its own cleansing system
and studying mice she was actually able
to
identify a sewage system within the
brain
called the glymphatic system named after
the cells that make it up called these
glial cells
now if that wasn't remarkable enough she
went on to make
two more incredible discoveries first
what she found
is that that cleansing system in the
brain is not
always switched on in high flow volume
across the 24-hour period instead
it was when those mice were actually
sleeping particularly when they went
into deep non-rem sleep that that
cleansing system
kicked into high gear the third
component that she discovered
and this is what makes it relevant to
our discussion on alzheimer's disease
is that one of the metabolic byproducts
one of the toxins that was cleared away
during sleep was that sticky toxic
protein
beta amyloid linked to alzheimer's
disease
and just recently scientists in boston
have discovered a very similar type of
pulsing cleansing brain mechanism in
human beings as well
now some of this discussion may sound
perhaps a little depressing
we know that as we get older in life our
sleep seems to
typically decline and our risk for
alzheimer's
generally increases but i think there's
actually a silver lining here
because unlike many of the other factors
that are associated with aging and
alzheimer's disease
for example changes in the physical
structure of the brain
those are fiendishly difficult to treat
and medicine doesn't have
any good wholesale approaches right now
but that
sleep is a missing piece in the
explanatory puzzle
of aging and alzheimer's disease is
exciting
because we may be able to do something
about it
what if we could actually augment human
sleep
and try to improve the quality of that
deep sleep
in midlife which is when we start to see
the decline in deep sleep beginning to
happen
what if we could actually shift from a
model
of late-stage treatment in alzheimer's
disease
to a model of mid-life prevention could
we go from
sicker to actually healthcare
and by modifying sleep could we actually
bend the arrow of
alzheimer's disease risk down on itself
that's something that i'm incredibly
excited about
and something that we're actively
researching right now